---
layout: post
title: "Building a Sustainable Developer Community of Practice"
date: 2018-09-04
---

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1000/1*UJfhCB_BBZQZHq9frA4WBQ.jpeg)
<span class="figcaption_hack">Photo by [Richard
Lee](https://unsplash.com/photos/zU2BzAcY8zA?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on
[Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/search/photos/flock-ducks?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)</span>

In [Lead the Change You Want to See at
Work](https://medium.com/design-ibm/lead-the-change-you-want-to-see-at-work-fd481f8a4b21),
I shared the story of how a few key individuals led transformation efforts that
changed the way IBM does business and led the way to the creation of a program
called FED@IBM.

Oftentimes, programs are created at companies and die out due to lack of
funding, lack of support, lack of executive backing, lack of interest or lack of
leadership. FED@IBM, a program created in 2015 to support the front-end
developer community at IBM, continues as an ongoing, thriving community despite
the loss of funding, executive support and resources pumped into the program at
its inception.

As the FED@IBM Program Lead, I have been reflecting on our program’s success and
strategizing ways to sustain the program. By recognizing that the program’s core
strength is its community, I have looked to [Cultivating Communities of
Practice: A Guide to Managing
Knowledge](https://hbr.org/product/cultivating-communities-of-practice-a-guide-to-managing-knowledge/3308-HBK-ENG)
by Etienne Wegner, Richard Arnold McDermott and William Snyder. I have been able
to identify what stage our community is currently in, and what conditions we
need in place, to continue to thrive.

I have identified three key factors which have contributed to the ongoing
success of the program: identifying engaging issues and building platforms for
sharing, empowering leaders through a distributed community, and defining the
group’s role in the organization.

*****

### Key: Identify Engaging Issues and Build Sharing Platforms

When the FED@IBM Program started, the first thing that [Damon
Deaner](https://twitter.com/DamonDeaner) (creator of the FED@IBM Program
appointed by IBM Design’s GM, [Phil Gilbert](https://twitter.com/philgilbertsr))
did was look at the existing grass root efforts already supporting front-end
developers. In 2014, front-end developers in the flagship IBM Design Studio in
Austin were meeting regularly to share what they had learned at a conference,
some tools they were using, or discussing best practices around front-end
development. Similar to the concept behind the popular site *meetup.com*, these
developers believed coming together could lead to a sense of community and lend
support to front-end developers who were sometimes the “lone ranger” on a
project, who were outnumbered by designers, or misunderstood by design leads.

Scaling out this effort beyond Austin posed some challenges; after all, IBM has
offices located all over the world. While some front-end developers were hired
for the newly introduced design program, many full-stack or back-end developers
across IBM (who worked on the UI layer of their application) could also benefit
from these meetups. We knew how to reach the FEDs hired through design but how
could we reach this larger unidentified developer population?

Damon asked [Jessica Tremblay](http://www.twitter.com/poofichu), who originally
organized the Austin-based meetup, to work with him on a way to scale out the
effort. As a result, they launched a regular, virtual global meetup dubbed
“FEDucation.” Rolled out in early 2015 and leveraging the knowledge of members
of the community, speakers brought topics like using APIs, code reviews, DevOps,
new concepts in JavaScript and using SVGs. Also presentations were given by
guest speakers like Alex Russell, Evan You and Sarah Drasner who spoke about
their areas of front-end expertise.

The global FEDucation calls are scheduled at a regular time every other week.
Free lunch was a draw for the local, Austin audience and when the calls were
moved to an earlier time to better accommodate developers in Europe, we switched
to breakfast tacos (we are in Austin, after all!). In addition to the live
broadcast, all calls are recorded and made available to the community following
each FEDucation in a shared repository of knowledge.

Sharing knowledge in FEDucation is regarded as a way to grow your career by
increasing a developer’s internal eminence as a subject matter expert in a topic
of interest to front-end developers. This benefit has contributed to keeping the
FEDucation sessions going strong more than 3 years later. Since its launch, more
than 100 FEDucation sessions have taken place and have been attended by more
than 4,500 developers from 58 countries.

In addition to the successful FEDucation effort, the Front-end Development Slack
workspace plays a critical role in supporting the community. As the [first Slack
created for people at
IBM](https://medium.com/design-ibm/listen-to-the-wild-ducks-how-ibm-adopted-slack-2bcfd3732680#.5ujkqlfa0),
the workspace continues to steadily grow and serve as the gathering place for
developers to ask questions and get help when they are stuck and share knowledge
about their craft. Communication tools like Slack also provide a great way for
program leaders to share announcements about upcoming FEDucation topics, calls
for volunteers on side projects, new initiatives or program updates.

*****

### Key: Empower Leaders Across A Distributed Community

In order for the FED@IBM community to sustain, the leadership of the program has
begun to shift from a single, Austin-based leader to a distributed and scaleable
model. In order for our community to continue to thrive, we created a
hub-and-spoke model to connect the developers located all over the world, in
many different time zones and cultures.

We brought together a group of thought leaders in our program from all over the
world to an in-person workshop. We used design thinking to examine our mission
and adjust it for the future. Our mission we evolved to:

> FED@IBM helps IBM grow revenue by crafting industry leading user experiences
> grounded in a set of open practices and shared core competencies that attract,
retain, and grow top talent

At the end of the in-person workshop, these thought leaders were charged with
going back to their local regions to create a local, in-person “branch” of the
global program. The first FED@IBM local branch was officially launched in
February 2018 during a week-long enablement event that the local FED@IBM branch
leaders in Böblingen, Germany, conducted. This event which combines
conference-styled talks with a hackathon, is called [Hackademy](http://what is
/#IBMHackademyâââby Sam Richard). Their event was delivered using a
blueprint from the same event which was prototyped by [Sam
Richard](https://twitter.com/snugug) and Damon and delivered by a core team at
16 live events. This event was packaged up as “Hackademy In A Box” with video
and written resources and instructions for any local team to conduct their own
event.

The key to the success for these local groups is the connection through the hub.
Early on in the program, local groups were formed after a Hackademy event took
place in a location as the Hackademy team moved on to the next location.

While there was great interest immediately following the conference/hackathon
event, we found that over time interest waned and often these local groups did
not survive. When we launched the official FED@IBM local branches earlier this
year, we immediately set up a shared Slack channel for the branch leaders,
GitHub repositories within the FED@IBM GitHub organization and scheduled regular
branch leader calls. Maintaining this connection has been critical to allow
support for branch leaders to share ideas on how to manage the local community
or ideas for activities.

For example, one of the groups shared how they were struggling with attendance
at their meetups and realized that members often forgot or had other meetings
scheduled over it because the event wasn’t added to their calendar. One local
branch leader shared their solution with the rest of the group (which was to
leverage an internal event registration tool that automatically subscribes
participants to the sessions and reserves time on their calendars) which
drastically improved attendance. Now the rest of the groups are benefitting from
this new way of managing their local meetups.

### Key: Define the Group’s Role Within the Organization

As a community of practice matures, it must define its role in the broader
organization. In order to become more than just a community of support and
instead a vehicle for transformation, the community needs to find ways to
measure its impact as well as prioritize what initiatives the group will focus
on.

FED@IBM’s hub of branch leaders is currently brainstorming and ideating on the
following areas of impact: onboarding new front-end developers, building and
sustaining community, increasing internal awareness and increasing external
eminence.

Areas of focus for onboarding center around things like the tools FEDs at IBM
use, what defines a FED at IBM and what are some things to avoid. The group has
defined guidelines for job postings and guidance for teams around how to
interview and hire a front-end developer.

The focus of initiatives around building and sustaining community are around
getting the word out about FED@IBM, rewarding participation, support running
branches and rewarding presenters. Digital badges, swag, thanking the group
leaders, and identifying their contributions to their managers are all potential
ideas.

Increasing internal awareness is perhaps one of the most critical areas for the
community to sustain. Attracting visibility and attention beyond word of mouth
to continue to attract not only members whose job roles align 100% with the
community but even those who spend even a small portion of their time coding the
UI.

Finally, increasing external eminence is critical as well and can also be a
vehicle for increasing internal awareness. Taking notice of how [IBM
Design](https://medium.com/design-ibm) and IBM’s [Carbon Design
System](https://twitter.com/_carbondesign) have leveraged this tactic, FED@IBM
is also ramping up our efforts by sharing our program externally through
external speaking engagements and thought leadership. Jessica Tremblay and Sam
Richard shared the FED@IBM story at last year’s DevRel Summit in their talk
[Finding Community: Building FED@IBM](https://vimeo.com/255655436) while my talk
at the Mobile Web+Dev Summit in March 2017 and follow-up blog post, [Leading the
Change You Want to See at
Work](http://kellychurchill.com/presentations/leading-change), focused on
telling the story from another perspective.

*****

#### What’s Next:

For all its success to date, FED@IBM still has a long way to go to impact and
transform the user interfaces we build. Due to IBM’s size, scale and
organizational model, the first front-end developers hired through design had
little power to effect change. They were far outnumbered by traditional
developers who worked as back-end or full-stack, owning and building interfaces
tightly coupled with back-end functionality. An architecture such as this does
not lend itself easily to specialists in front-end, back-end and middleware.
Developers who build those systems often do not recognize their skill gaps in
modern UI development practices which promote performance, accessibility, and
API-driven content.

As the IBM Design competency has matured, design has risen to more equitable
leadership positions in product teams across IBM. Design leadership is driving
the need for modern approaches to software engineering and skilled developers to
execute their designs to executive leadership. Design leaders are pointing to
higher NPS scores on projects staffed with designers than projects without
designers. Engineering teams are steadily increasing their demand for front-end
developers and are now coming to the FED@IBM program and leadership for
guidance. IBM Design and FED@IBM are pushing for engineering leaders to be put
in place who have passion for and who care about the UI.

*****

I often say that my goal is for FED@IBM to no longer exist because it will have
achieved its goal and its mission will be an integral part of IBM and the way we
work. While there is still much work to be done, I see many signs pointing in
the direction that we are on the cusp of this transformation. I would love to be
able to look back in 2–3 years and marvel at the memories of the early days of
the program and the old IBM at the tail-end of a successful transformation.

*****

Resources

[Lead the Change You Want to See at
Work](https://medium.com/design-ibm/lead-the-change-you-want-to-see-at-work-fd481f8a4b21)
by Kelly Churchill

[Cultivating Communities of Practice: A Guide to Managing
Knowledge](https://hbr.org/product/cultivating-communities-of-practice-a-guide-to-managing-knowledge/3308-HBK-ENG)
by Etienne Wegner, Richard Arnold McDermott and William Snyder

[Listen to the Wild Ducks: How IBM adopted
Slack](https://medium.com/design-ibm/listen-to-the-wild-ducks-how-ibm-adopted-slack-2bcfd3732680#.5ujkqlfa0)
by Bill Higgins

[What is Hackademy](https://snugug.com/musings/what-is-ibm-hackademy/) by Sam
Richard

[Finding Community: Building FED@IBM](https://vimeo.com/255655436), Jessica
Tremblay and Sam Richard at DevRelSummit 2017

