---
layout: post
title: "Playback on Design Thinking — Not Just For Designers"
date: 2018-11-14
---
My previous article, [Design Thinking — Not Just For
Designers](https://medium.com/design-ibm/design-thinking-not-just-for-designers-87cda32b0799),
has gotten over 5,000 views since I wrote it last summer. The article is also
still getting a steady stream of readers, some of whom have highlighted the
content. Now that a year has passed since the completion of the on-boarding
program described in that article, it seems like a good time to playback the
outcomes.

Playbacks are key moments during design thinking. They are an opportunity to
share with your stakeholders or your team what you’ve learned and what your team
is planning. Playbacks are used to create alignment and share information by
sharing what you’ve observed, reflected and made by telling a story about your
users.

In my previous article, I concluded by saying:

> Ultimately, deployment to their teams will be the true test of how well this new
> developer track has prepared new developers to join their teams. Once deployed,
we will ask their managers to compare their level of preparedness to the level
of their previous new developers that were deployed directly to their teams;
this feedback will be the ultimate determination of the success of this new
developer track.

### Before (or the As-Is Experience)

In preparation for the design thinking workshop, we surveyed front-end
developers (FEDs) who went through IBM Design Bootcamp (the as-is experience)
and asked them to rate how well they felt their experience prepared them for
deployment to their team. We also asked managers of FEDs who went through
bootcamp to rate how prepared they felt their FEDs were who were deployed to
their team.

We asked them to answer this question on a scale of 0 to 10 so that we could
determine a Net Promotor Score (NPS). NPS is an index value ranging from -100 to
100 that measures the willingness of customers to recommend a company’s products
or services to others. NPS has become a widely-adopted measurement so these
scores can be quickly understood.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*Gr6BLsIpJH7OcPEXUqvaIw.png)

<span class="figcaption_hack">NPS scores for front-end developers in the previous IBM Design on-boarding program.</span>

While responses would have been very different for designers responding to this
question since the program was designed for them, the scores for front-end
developers were not so great. They rated their experience overall at an NPS
Score of -42.9. Managers of those developers rated the preparedness of their
developers even lower at an NPS Score of -75.

Some of the feedback participants gave along with their ratings were:

“Have projects for FEDs to actually do FED work. During my bootcamp, I spent
*maybe* a week total time coding, and during the rest of the time I was acting a
research assistant. In the second half of the program, I think FEDs would
benefit more from working on teams together and having projects that are
FED-ready to complete.”

“What would even be better is to drop them into a project that already exists —
give some experience to working with other people’s code. Or experience using a
component library.”

“Either pick projects that allow for FEDs to code and advocate for them pushing
code or set aside time for them to code and bake it into the program.”

And from their managers:

“Bootcamp doesn’t prepare any of the participants for anything other than a
programmed view for playbacks. Perhaps working in a team, but ill-prepared for
anything else.”

### The Prototype

Taking this feedback into the Design Thinking activities described in [Design
Thinking — Not Just For
Designers](https://medium.com/design-ibm/design-thinking-not-just-for-designers-87cda32b0799),
we prototyped a new experience which allowed the front-end developers to spend
four consecutive weeks building an application. The prototypes for the
application were designed to assist the IBM Design recruiting team with
collecting feedback from interviewers during on-site interviews. Their system
had relied on a series of spreadsheets that were fraught with problems — from
data overwriting to controlling who could access the feedback and ratings given
for a candidate.

The prototypes for the new application were created by [Bethany
Sonefeld](https://www.twitter.com/bsonefeld), a designer on the [Carbon Design
System](https://www.carbondesignsystem.com/) and provided an opportunity for the
front-end developers to work with the design system and components that have
been widely adopted by IBM product teams. The front-end developers built and
launched their application as new features in an existing project, allowing them
to work within an existing codebase. They gained experience implementing a
database as well as developing and deploying their application using IBM Cloud
platform and services.

Another key component of the prototype included leveraging senior developers to
present topics of interest to the new-hire developers. We created a series of
sessions covering topics such as:

• Getting Started with Carbon Design System<br> • GitHub Workflow<br> •
Deploying to IBM Cloud<br> • Node<br> • Coding Standards

While I felt strongly that this new experience would serve to provide the new
hire front-end developers with a much richer and specialized on-boarding
experience and prepare them to be a developer at IBM, we were constrained by the
framework of the existing program. Working as whole team with designers and
offering managers and learning to practice design thinking, would come *after*
this specialized front-end developer track.

The first playback to the rest of the new hires who were working in the design
phase, doing user research and playing back their findings to stakeholders and
IBM Design leaders, was atypical. Rather, their first presentation was a
developer demo, showing what they had begun to implement and build based on the
prototypes they were given. Not surprisingly, there was a great deal of
questions asked about whether they had talked to the users of their application
and feedback was given to the team that they should not overlook this practice.

The team took that feedback and in their following weeks of the 4-week program,
they incorporated user research into their future iterations. By the end of the
track, having built a functioning application that could immediately be used by
the recruiting team, they were ready to join their design and offering
management colleagues for the remaining 6 weeks of the on-boarding program with
all the tools in their toolbox needed to develop front-end prototypes and even
in some cases working applications.

### One year later

A year has passed since the developers in this prototyped FED track joined IBM
as new-hire developers. Immediately following the three-month on-boarding
program, they were deployed to product teams working in IBM Storage, IBM
Cognitive Systems and IBM Security.

Using the same survey as before, I surveyed the participants of the prototyped
FED track and their managers. I was astonished at the huge jump in their
ratings:

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*LeWOEqVskHfB9HltVfa4vA.png)

<span class="figcaption_hack">NPS scores for front-end developers in the prototyped FED track in IBM Design on-boarding program.</span>

Based on the responses of the front-end developers who participated in the prototype, they rated the experience overall at an NPS Score of 33  - a jump of 75. Managers of those developers rated the preparedness of their developers had an even larger jump — responding with an NPS Score of 50, a jump of 125!

In support of their ratings, they said:

“Learned about ideal FED stack and workflow. Actually got to code and practice
skillset. Still a lot of domain specific/general IBM product knowledge to learn
after joining permanent team.”

“Being able to start coding right away for the micro project, plus meeting and
learning from other FEDs via the FED sessions, helped me a LOT. It helped me
quickly prototype for the longer 6 week “max” project and also prepared me to
jump right in with my product team when Bootcamp was over.”

“Prepared me well for collaborating with other FEDs and other designers, but
didn’t prepare me well for working with those outside of the studio (mainly
tools and systems that might be used by non-studio developers).”

And one of their managers said:

“Collaborating and working with other developers and designers is his biggest
takeaway from the Bootcamp. He didn’t have much experience in working with other
developers or designers before Bootcamp. He also thought bringing the FEDs in
for talks was helpful during the Bootcamp.”

*****

Since this prototype, the entire IBM Design on-boarding program has been
overhauled into a new experience. Instead of focusing strictly on designers and
teaching the practice of design thinking, the program has evolved into a rich
experience combining design, technology and business.

Through that overhaul, the team that developed the new program also practiced
design thinking by conducting user research through surveys and interviews with
past participants and managers and business leaders throughout the company. They
developed an experience which incorporated the specific outcomes of the FED
track — the seedling for the **technology** focus of the new program. In
addition, they expanded the concept I prototyped of presentations by senior
developers to include all disciplines — content, visual, user experience and
user research — delivering over 130 sessions to both interns and new-hires.

Through my practice of using design thinking to create a better experience for
developers hired through IBM Design, from initial research, to workshopping, to
writing hills, to executing a prototype, to playing back a measurable outcome, I
have been able to see how design thinking really is not just for designers.
Instead of focusing on the word “design” in the term “design thinking,” I like
to focus on the “thinking” part. After all, design thinking is a way of solving
problems and is a technique that *anyone* can learn and use to achieve better
outcomes for their users.

*****

#### Published on [Design at IBM](https://medium.com/design-ibm?source=footer_card)
